So we're gonna introduce Flexbox with
this little PowerPoint show here.
I wanna give you a little bit of
background about Responsive Web Design and
what it is.
And then we're going to talk
a little bit more about Flexbox.
Including its history and
its syntax and things to think
about when you work with Flexbox.
Then we'll get into some coding.
So to start here,
Responsive Design was defined by
Ethan Marcotte back in May of 2010 now.
So 11 years it's been since
Ethan Marcotte came up with the idea of
Responsive Design.
And he defined it as, images that resize
and media queries and a grid based layout.
Now, when he came up with this concept,
the only way to do layouts on a web
page were pretty much two ways.
One was a table based layout which
everybody knew was bad news.
And float based layouts,
which were a lot more difficult to
work with at that point in time.
And so fortunately Flexbox has since
gone through several iterations and
become well-supported by browsers.
So the grid based layout is
much easier than it used to be.
The images that resize
have come a long way.
We're gonna talk a lot about those.
And of course, we're gonna work with
media queries all through this course.
So a grid based layout, you might be
familiar with from Responsive Design
frameworks like bootstrap or
foundation UI kit.
There's many of these frameworks.
The concept being that you have
some number of columns on the page.
And then you're going to group
together those columns into a unit.
And that will become where you actually
display something on your web page.
The concept here comes from print design
where printers have thought about columns
in terms of laying things out for
a very long period of time.
It helps keep layouts neat and
clean and flexible in a lot of ways.
These days we tend to be breaking
away from this format a little bit.
But we will look at it a little
bit both in terms of Flexbox and
in terms of CSS Grid over this course.
So that you can understand this model.
We'll also look at some ways people
are looking at these types of
layouts using different
types of technologies.
The images that resize have
come a long way as well.
So last time I recorded this course in
2017, we talked about the picture element.
And that was all.
It turns out that there are two other
ways that are now in HTML5 sizes and
source set.
Those happen to come out the same
month and get supported by edge.
At the same month that I was recording
this course the last time around,
which is why I didn't talk about them.
So, picture, sizes, and source set
are all very well supported now.
We will be talking about those later
on today In terms of Responsive images,
and how that can work.
And then of course,
finally, CSS media queries.
So this comes straight from the CSS,
there's not any JavaScript involved.
And for the most part, people have used
media queries in terms of screen widths
minimum width, maximum width and so forth.
But media queries are much more than that,
especially today we have a lot more types
of media queries that are supported.
You can do portrait or landscape.
You can do aspect ratios.
And you could do a print
media query because
after all media query is
actually all about the media.
So you can ask if you're just trying
to print out something as opposed to
putting it on the screen.
So keep that in mind as you
work with media queries.
They don't all have to be screen widths.
So how does Ethan Marcotte
ideas hold up today?
Well those grid based lands tend to
be associated a lot with frameworks.
People tend to think of them as very
heavy and difficult to work with.
And I'm here to tell you it doesn't have
to be not if you know what you're doing.
That even the images that
resize are often forgotten.
A lot of people just put up the same
picture across all of their devices.
Or they go after complicated solutions,
maybe something that's JavaScript base.
I'm here to tell you that's all baked
into HTML and it's well supported.
Nothing could actually be
easier than responsive images.
A lot of developers today
are trying to avoid media queries.
And there may be some reasons for that.
I'm not sure if it's complicated CSS or
if it's performance that
people are concerned about.
But media queries are not
that difficult to understand.
I hope that after two days
of working on this stuff,
you'll have a better idea of
how media queries work in CSS.
And how to read the code correctly
to understand where your styles
are coming from.
I suspect that's part of the reason
people don't like media queries.
And then of course,
everybody comes along and says, well,
container queries are gonna
solve all my problems.
Subgrid is gonna solve all my problems.
This is something that I've heard now for
20 years.
There's always some latest hottest new
technology that's just out of reach that
is gonna solve all of our problems.
And I'm here to tell
you that it's not true.
That you have very good technology right
now that you can work with even before you
get to container queries and subgrid.
Which are coming.
I haven't covered them in this course
because they're still under development at
this point in time.
But they will be here
hopefully sometime soon.
>> How do you decide on the media
queries for your projects?
>> How do I decide on the media
queries for my projects?
What looks good.
So in other words, you don't tie
your media queries to devices.
Because devices change every
single day of the week.
So it's not gonna be like the old days
where you can say definitively where
exactly certain media
queries should be set.
Furthermore, you can have media
queries for one part of the page.
Because that part of the page needs
a certain set of media queries.
Then another part of the page maybe
have a different set of media
queries associated with it to make
it look good across break points.
So this is part of what
I'm talking about in terms
of fragmenting the approach
to Responsive Design now.
So that you can focus on smaller parts
of your page instead of media queries to
control that part of the page to make that
each element on the page look optimal
in its layout.
So as you move forward
working on Responsive Design,
keep in mind these guiding
principles of the grid based layout.
The images that resize and
their media queries is something that are
gonna define what responsive design is.
Define what responsive layouts are, but
you don't have to strictly adhere to them
the way Ethan Marcotte described them
11 years ago at this point in time.
So let's move on then to Flexbox and
talk a little bit more specifically about
what's going on in the world of Flexbox.
Flexbox stands for flexible boxes.
And the specification was defined
actually around 2008- 2009.
And they were never envisioned
of laying out whole web pages.
This is a theme that we have in CSS.
We have hacked our way through layouts for
so long.
The idea here with Flexbox was that
it would lay out parts of webpages
that Flexbox was for
UI as opposed to entire page layouts.
Flexbox is really good at at vertical
centering and equal heights.
And it's really easy to reorder boxes,
which is a wonderful thing.
But the big disadvantage with Flexbox,
is that it was never designed to
be locked down for the layouts.
It's really a one
dimensional type of layout.
And it's very hard to understand exactly
what I'm talking about when I say one
dimensional layout.
But I want you to think about rows.
And if you look at web pages today,
you can very much see that people
are thinking about a row on the page.
Maybe it has some things inside of it.
Then we have another row on
the page with some other things.
Another row row on the page, more things.
That is because Flexbox thinks about
itself in terms of rows as opposed to
thinking of itself in two
dimensions more like CSS Grid.
A couple of pieces of terminology that
will be helpful to you at the concept
of the main axis and the cross axis,
the flex item and the flex container.
I'm really not going to talk a lot
about flex containers and flex items.
Flex containers are parents.
Flex items are children.
And this has to do with the HTML and
the way the HTML is put together.
We're gonna talk a lot about
it when we start doing code.
Because whether an item is a parent or
whether it's a child would determine what
CSS properties are available to
leverage in laying out your web page.
Flexbox of course can
go in two directions.
So if you happen to have the setup for
columns.
The main axis is the vertical axis.
But if you set your
Flexbox to rows instead,
your main axis becomes
the horizontal axis.
And the cross axis becomes
the vertical axis.
I don't hear a lot of people talking
about main axis and cross axis.
When they talk about Flexbox,
they mostly talk about rows and columns.
Probably because main axis and cross axis
are terms that are a little bit confusing
and change with the dimensions
of the web page.
So, you'll hear me talk a lot
about horizontal or vertical.
You'll hear me talk a lot
about flex containers,
flex items, and parents and children.
So the three versions are from Flexbox.
They started way back,
like I said in 2009.
We had a display property,
the value of which was box.
And that would allow us to use some
Flexbox properties as you know,
browsers rolled out much more
slowly back in those days.
And so we had all Older browsers
that were supporting the syntax.
The WU3C had something happened and
everybody decided to redefine
everything having to do with Flexbox.
So we came up with a new syntax
that rolled out in 2011.
The only browser that ever supported
this so called tweener syntax.
The syntax of comes in between the old and
the new version.
The current version that we use now.
The only browser that
supported that was IE 10.
Good times.
And so in 2016,
we finally had display Flex.
We had all the browsers
that are supporting it.
The browser's have been supporting
it now for quite a while.
It's a very safe type
of technology to use.
Now as always, the only time you need
to be concerned about this is with IE
support at this moment in time.
Because of course IE is
no longer being updated.
I hope you don't have
to support IE anymore.
But I am aware that there are people
mostly working in universities or
in government who may still
have to support that browser.
All of the other modern ones that
roll out on a regular basis.
Safari, Firefox, Chrome and edge,
all of them support Flexbox just fine.
There's some games you might be aware
of that have been out for some time.
Feel free to play these on your own.
Flexbox Froggy and
Flexbox Defense will focus on really
the syntax of how to get Flexbox to work.
But it doesn't really teach you
the thought behind Flexbox.
And so I'm gonna spend more time on how
to think about a Flexbox problem rather
than on all of the various syntax.
So these are games that
you can play on your own.
There's a ton of properties
that are available,
you may want to print out some information
like this I have here on the slide.
I think I have a separate text file
that you can refer to for that.
Or just take a look at CSS tricks.
They have a great page that describes all
of the properties and values for flexbox